>> What can the final words
spoken by the dying tell us
about life's greatest mystery?
According to the findings of
a long-term research project,
a great deal.
This is "Gaia News."
Lisa Smartt is a linguist
who, in 2012, became
interested in the words
spoken by the dying
when she noticed peculiar
changes in her father's speech
as he was passing.
>> So one of the things I
noticed while I was sitting
bedside with my father--
well, the first thing
was he started talking
about angels in the room.
And my dad was a
hardcore scientist.
So when I heard my tough,
gruff, cigar-smoking papa
talking about angels in
the room, I took notice.
And being a linguist, I pulled
out my pencil and my pad
and started taking notes.
Three days before he died,
he shared that the angels
say only three days left.
And, indeed, three days
later, he was gone.
And what began to
emerge in my notes
intrigued me and led me to
the language of the dying.
And there wasn't much written.
So I attended a workshop
with Dr. Raymond Moody.
And together, we established
the Final Words Project.
>> Since the project began,
Lisa has collected 200 accounts
of the last words of the dying
from those at their bedsides.
Throughout more than
a decade of analysis
of 2,000 final
utterances, Lisa has
come to see many universal
patterns and recurring themes.
>> Specifically, you see
patterns about a big event
coming.
Someone might say, oh,
the big dance is coming,
or the big art show is coming.
And then people also
talk about traveling,
some kind of the ship is
ready, the boat is ready,
feeling that something
is moving them along
that's almost bigger
than they are.
And then another way that
this hybrid language appears
is someone may say,
get me my checkbook,
I need to pay at the
gate, as if they're
referring to Heaven's gate.
So they're bringing
pieces of this world
and beginning to
talk with the other.
People might start
talking about things
that some family members
or loved ones might think
are nonsense, like,
my husband, who
had died 10 years ago,
standing at the edge of my bed.
Now, to some people, they
may think that's nonsense.
But it seems from our
research and others
that there actually are
visitors standing at the bedside
with those who are dying,
and that's not nonsense.
>> One particularly fascinating
implication is the glimpse
these final words seem to
provide of what may come after
physical death.
>> There's a lot of repetition.
One well-known example of this
is Steve Jobs's "wow, wow, wow"
before he died.
I think those were actually
his very final words.
And you can only
imagine what did
he see, what did that
exclamation refer to.
And people definitely start
talking about how beautiful it
is over there.
I've come in contact with
so many people who have
had near-death experiences.
There's just sense of--
such a sense of peace
that the first word that
comes to mind is peace.
And you can see
this in some people
even before they die-- that
there is this energy that
seems to be moving towards
some kind of new emergence
or a new state of being.
>> Just what do these final
words suggest about the nature
of consciousness?
>> And just metaphor, talking
about angels in the room
and visions and predeceased
relatives in the walls looking
like trees or seeing lights
and all kinds of things are
a complete indication to me
that there's something going
on as people are dying that
is some reflection that
consciousness continues.
And that process
of the transition--
I do believe we return to
source, to that light and love.
A lot of people describe
from near-death experiences
as that ball of consciousness--
as light and love.
>> Lisa points out that despite
the many transcendent words
spoken by the dying, the process
itself is not always easy
and offers this advice for
those at their bedsides.
>> I suggest that people
have a journal or log next
to the person's bed or, if you
feel comfortable and they do
feel comfortable, just put it
on your phone and record things.
Seeing them, begin to
see if you see any themes
or language or even
references to visitors
because sometimes,
because of our own grief,
and also because some things
sometimes sound nonsensical out
of context, we don't
really-- we're not really
tracking the
patterns of language
or what people-- or the
themes that people are saying.
See if it's possible to
hold the whole experience
as a sacred experience, even
as difficult and challenging--
just hold it as sacred and
assume that what you're seeing
and what you're hearing are
actually sacred messages.
>> For Lisa, this Final Words
Project has been a truly
profound personal journey and
a great help in guiding her own
mother through
the dying process.
>> When I speak to my mother and
say, when she's going fearful,
I can say, God's holding you, or
whatever you want to call that
larger divine--
the light.
The light is holding you.
And I'm so grateful that I was
exposed to all this material
to know so deeply some other
dimensional experience happens.
I don't know quite
what it is, but it is.
It exists.
>> For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.